The story is told through limited third person point of view, with most of the story concerning a single Roxolani
captain. During a routine journey of conquest, they happen upon Earth. The Roxolani anticipate a simple and rewarding
campaign, as they can detect no use of gravity manipulation, the cornerstone of their civilization. Humanity is awed
by the invaders, as the maneuverability granted by that technology suggests the rest of their civilization is equally
impressive. But as they begin their assault, things take a turn for the absurdâ€”the Roxolani attack with matchlock
weapons and black powder explosives. Humans retaliate with automatic weapons and missiles. The battle is short,
and most of the invaders are killed. A few are captured alive.

When they are interrogated, the truth becomes evident. The Roxolani's method of manipulating gravity is absurdly
simple, and they were thus able to begin utilizing aircraft, spacecraft, and even faster than light travel during
their Age of Sail. This enabled them to engage in wars of conquest not only on a planetary but a galactic scale.
However, gravity technology by itself had no application other than transportation, and was such a bizarre discovery
that their scientific theorems couldn't accommodate it. As a result, the scientific method was abandoned and their
technological development ground to a halt. They have never achieved, for example, their equivalent of the Industrial
Revolution, much less the Information Revolution. Most civilizations experience this at an even earlier stage of
development, and the Roxolani found conquest a simple and productive endeavor.

In contrast, humanity somehow missed developing gravity technology, and its unfocused expenditure of creativity and
resources thus resulted in less immediately rewarding but ultimately more versatile applications and development of a
very wide range of knowledge - medicine, heavy industry, electric motors, computers, nuclear power, etc. But without
gravity technology, they were restricted to a single solar system, and until recently a single planet.

The key term being were. The captured Roxolani ships reveal their secrets to any moderately trained eye, and gravity
technology will spread like wildfire. Earth is overpopulated, the galaxy is filled with civilizations even less
advanced than the Roxolani - the stage is set for humanity to build an interstellar empire.

In the course of the story, Turtledove presents what might happen if a technologically inferior species, with two
advanced technologies unconnected to anything else, were to engage humanity in warfare. The story directly references
the poem "The Road Not Taken" by Robert Frost when the conquered aliens are discussing why humanity is, in their eyes,
so advanced.

In the discussions among the characters, the possible problems of life on Earth in the future are mentioned, with the
expanded population and food shortages referenced as possible causes of war. One Roxolani wonders if there is truth
to the Earth weapons of which they have heard, but not seen. His comrade said he believed them, because he heard
the fear in their voices when speaking of nuclear weapons.

As the characters realize the impact of the narrow but critical Roxolani technology for another, generally more
advanced society, the story closes with the characters asking themselves, "What have we done?"
